#### **Computer Components:**
- ! Contemporary computer designs are based on concepts developed by *John von Neumann*:
	- Data and instructions are stored in a <u>single</u> read write memory.
	- The contents of this memory are <u>addressable</u> by location, <u>without</u> regard to the type of data contained there.
	- Execution occurs in a sequential fashion ( <u>unless explicitly modified</u> ) from one instruction to the next.
#### **Hardware and Software Approaches:**

> [!NOTE]
> The set of hardware will perform various functions on data depending on <u>*control signals*</u> applied to the hardware.

- ! Programming in <u>hardware</u>, the system <u>accepts data</u> and <u>produces results</u>.
- ! Programming in <u>software</u>, the system <u>accepts data</u> and <u>control signals</u> and <u>produces results</u>.

> [!NOTE]
> Thus, instead of rewiring the hardware for each new program, the programmer merely needs to supply a new set of control signals Computer Components.

#### **Computer Function:**

> [!WARNING]
> The basic function performed by a computer is the <u>execution of a program</u>, which consists of a set of instructions stored in memory.

- ! Instruction processing consists of two steps:
	1. The processor reads ( <u>fetches</u> ) instructions from memory <u>one at a time</u>.
	2. <u>Executes</u> each instruction.

#### **Action Categories:**
1. ! **Processor-memory:** *Data transferred from processor to memory or from memory to processor.*
2. ! **Processor-I/O:** *Data transferred to or from a peripheral device by transferring between the processor and an I/O module.*
3. ! **Data Processing:** *The processor may perform some arithmetic or logic operation on data.*
4. ! **Control:** *An instruction may specify that the sequence of execution be altered.*

#### **Instruction Cycle State:**
1. **Instruction fetch ( IF ):** *Read instruction from its memory location into the processor.*
2. **Instruction operation decoding ( IOD ):** *Analyze instruction to determine the type of operation to be performed and operand(s) to be used.*
3. **Operand address calculation ( OAC ):** *If the operation involves reference to an operand in memory or available via I/O, then determine the address of the operand.*
4. **Operand fetch ( OF ):** *Fetch the operand from memory or read it in from I/O.*
5. **Data operation ( DO ):** *Perform the operation indicated in the instruction.*
6. **Operand store ( OS ):** *Write the result into memory or out to I/O.*
7. **Instruction address calculation ( IAC ):** *Determine the address of the next instruction to be executed. Usually, this involves adding a fixed number to the address of the previous instruction.*
#### **Interrupts:**
- **Interrupt:** *is a signal that requests the processor to suspend its current execution and service the occurred interrupt.*

> [!NOTE]
> - After the execution of the interrupt service routine, the processor resumes the execution of the suspended program.
> - Interrupts can be of two types <u>hardware</u> interrupts and <u>software</u> interrupts.

#### **Classes of Interrupts:**
- ! **Program:** *Generated by some condition that occurs as a result of instruction execution, such as arithmetic overflow, division by zero, attempt to execute an illegal machine instruction, or reference outside a user’s allowed memory space.*
- ! **Timer:** *Generated by a timer within the processor. This allows the operating system to perform certain functions on a regular basis.*
- ! **I/O:** *is Generated by an I/O controller, to signal the normal completion of an operation, request service from the processor, or to signal a variety of error conditions.*
- ! **Hardware:** *Failure Generated by a failure such as power failure or memory parity error.*
#### **I/O Function:**
- @ I/O module can exchange data directly with the processor.
- ! Processor can read data from or write data to an I/O module.
- @ I/O instructions rather than memory referencing instructions.
#### **Direct memory access (DMA):**
- ! Allow I/O exchanges to occur <u>directly</u> with memory.
- @ The processor grants an <u>I/O module the authority</u> to read from or write to memory so that the I/O memory transfer can occur without tying up the processor.
- ! DMA <u>relieves</u> the processor of responsibility for the exchange.


#### **Interconnection Structures:**
- **Interconnection Structures:** *The collection of paths connecting the various modules.*
- The design of this structure will depend on the <u>exchanges that must be made among modules</u>.

#### **The interconnection structure must support:**
1. Memory to processor.
2. Processor to memory.
3. I/O to processor.
4. Processor to I/O.
5. I/O to or from memory.


#### **Bus Interconnection:**
- **Control Bus:**
	- Used to <u>control the access</u> and the use of the data and address lines.
	- Because the data and address lines are <u>shared by all components</u> there must be a means of controlling their use.
	- Control signals <u>transmit both command and timing information</u> among system modules.
	- Timing signals indicate the <u>validity of data and address information</u>.
	- Command signals specify operations to be performed.
- **Address Bus:**
	- Used to <u>designate the source or destination</u> of the data on the data bus.
	- The address lines are generally used to <u>address I/O ports</u>.

#### **Typical control lines include:**
1. ? **Memory write:** *causes data on the bus to be written into the addressed location.*
2. ? **Memory read:** *causes data from the addressed location to be placed on the bus.*
3. ? **I/O write :** *causes data on the bus to be output to the addressed I/O port.*
4. ? **I/O read :** *causes data from the addressed I/O port to be placed on the bus.*
5. ? **Transfer ACK :** *indicates that data have been accepted from or placed on the bus.*
6. ? **Bus request:** *indicates that a module needs to gain control of the bus.*
7. ? **Bus grant:** *indicates that a requesting module has been granted control of the bus.*
8. ? **Interrupt request:** *indicates that an interrupt is pending.*
9. ? **Interrupt ACK:** *acknowledges that the pending interrupt has been recognized.*
10. ? **Clock:** *is used to synchronize operations.*
11. ? **Reset:** *initializes all modules.*


#### **Definitions:**
1. **Instruction Cycle:** The processing required for a single instruction.
2. **Processor-memory:** *Data transferred from processor to memory or from memory to processor.*
3. **Processor-I/O:** *Data transferred to or from a peripheral device by transferring between the processor and an I/O module.*
4. **Data Processing:** *The processor may perform some arithmetic or logic operation on data.*
5. **Control:** *An instruction may specify that the sequence of execution be altered.*
6. **Instruction fetch ( IF ):** *Read instruction from its memory location into the processor.*
7. **Instruction operation decoding ( IOD ):** *Analyze instruction to determine the type of operation to be performed and operand(s) to be used.*
8. **Operand address calculation ( OAC ):** *If the operation involves reference to an operand in memory or available via I/O, then determine the address of the operand.*
9. **Operand fetch ( OF ):** *Fetch the operand from memory or read it in from I/O.*
10. **Data operation ( DO ):** *Perform the operation indicated in the instruction.*
11. **Interrupt:** *is a signal that requests the processor to suspend its current execution and service the occurred interrupt.*
12. **Interconnection Structures:** *The collection of paths connecting the various modules.*